gentlemen welcome to you both
let's start the economy segment one and
let's begin with jobs what are the major
differences between the two of you about
how you would go about creating new jobs
you have two minutes each of you have
two minutes to start a coin toss has
determined mr president you go first
well thank you very much jim for this
opportunity i want to thank governor
romney and the university of denver for
your hospitality
there are a lot of points i want to make tonight but the most important one is that 20 years ago i became the luckiest man on earth because michelle obama agreed to marry me and so i just want to wish sweetie you happy anniversary and let you know that a year from now we will not be celebrating it in front of 40 million people you know four years ago we went through the worst financial crisis since the great depression millions of jobs were lost the auto industry was on the brink of collapse the financial system had frozen up and because of the resilience and the determination of the american people we've begun to fight our way back over the last 30 months we've seen 5 million jobs in the private sector created the auto industry has come roaring back and housing has begun to rise but we all know that we've still got a lot of work to do and so the question here tonight is not where we've been but where we're going governor romney has a perspective that says if we cut taxes skewed towards the wealthy and roll back regulations that we'll be better off i've got a different view i think we've got to invest in education and training i think it's important for us to develop new sources of energy here in america that we change our tax code to make sure that we're helping small businesses and companies that are investing here in the united states that we take some of the money that we're saving as we wind down two wars to rebuild america and that we reduce our deficit in a balanced way that allows us to make these critical investments now it ultimately is going to be up to the voters to you which path we should take are we going to double on top-down economic policies that helped to get us into this mess or do we embrace a
new economic patriotism that says
america does best when the middle class
does best and i'm looking forward to
having that debate
governor romney two minutes thank you
jim it's an honor to be here with you
and i appreciate the chance to be with
the president i'm pleased to be at the
university of denver appreciate their
welcome and also the presidential
commission on these debates and
congratulations to you mr president on
your anniversary i'm sure this was the
most romantic place you could imagine
here here with me so i congratulations
this is obviously a very tender topic
i've had the occasion over the last
couple of years of meeting people across
the country i was in dayton ohio and a
woman grabbed my arm and she said i've
been out of work since may can you help
me ann yesterday was at a rally in denver
and a woman came up to her with a baby
in her arms and said ann my husband has
had four jobs in three years part-time
jobs he's lost his most recent job and we've
now just lost our home can you help us
and the answer is yes we can help but
it's going to take a different path not
the one we've been on not the one the
president describes as a top-down cut
taxes for the rich that's not what i'm
going to do my plan has five basic parts
one get us energy independent north
american energy independent that creates
about four million jobs number two open
up more trade particularly in latin
america crack down on china if and when
they cheat number three make sure our
people have the skills they need to
succeed and the best schools in the
world we're a far away from that now
number four get us to a balanced budget
number five champion small business it's
small business that creates the jobs in
america and over the last four years
small business people have decided that
america may not be the place to open a
new business because new business
startups are down to a 30-year low i
know what it takes to get small business
growing again to hire people now i'm
concerned that the path that we're on
has just been unsuccessful the president
has a view very similar to the view he
had when he ran four years ago that a
bigger government spending more
taxing more regulating more if you will
trickle-down government would work
that's not the right answer for america
i'll restore the vitality that gets
america working again thank you mr
president please respond directly to what the
governor just said about trickle-down
his trickle-down approach as
he said yours is well let me talk
specifically about what i think we need
to do first we've got to improve our
education system and we've made enormous
progress drawing on ideas both from
democrats and republicans that are
already starting to show gains in some
of the toughest to deal with schools
we've got a program called race to the
top that has prompted reforms in forty-six
states around the country raising
standards improving how we train
teachers so now i want to hire another
hundred thousand new math and science
teachers and create two million more
slots in our community colleges so that
people can get trained for the jobs that
are out there right now and i want to
make sure that we keep tuition low for
our young people when it comes to our
tax code governor romney and i both
agree that our corporate tax rate is too
high so i want to lower it particularly
for manufacturing taking it down to twenty-five percent
but i also want to close those loopholes
that are giving incentives for companies
that are shipping jobs overseas i want
to provide tax breaks for companies that
are investing here in the united states
on energy governor romney and i we both
agree that we've got to boost american
energy production and oil and natural
gas production are higher than they've
been in years but i also believe that
we've got to look at the energy sources
of the future like wind and solar and
biofuels and make those investments so
all of this is possible now in order for
us to do it we do have to close our
deficit and one of the things i'm sure
we'll be discussing tonight is how do we
deal with our tax code and how do we
make sure that we are reducing spending
in a responsible way but also how do we
have enough revenue to make those
investments and this is where there's a
difference because governor romney's
central economic plan calls for a five
trillion dollar tax cut
on top of the extension of the bush tax
cuts that's another trillion dollars and
two trillion dollars in additional
military spending that the military
hasn't asked for that's eight trillion
dollars how we pay for that reduce the
deficit and make the investments that we
need to make without dumping those costs
onto middle-class americans i think is
one of the central questions this
campaign both of you have spoken about
a lot of different things and we're going to
try to get through them in as specific
a way as we possibly can but first
governor romney do you have a question
that you'd like to ask the president
directly about something he just said
well sure i'd like to clear up the
record and go through it piece by piece
first of all i don't have a five
trillion dollar tax cut i don't have a
tax cut of a scale that you're talking
about my view is that we ought to
provide tax relief to people in the
middle class but i'm not going to reduce
the share of taxes paid by high-income
people high-income people are doing just
fine in this economy they'll do fine
whether you're president or i am the
people who are having the hard time right
now are middle-income americans under
the president's policies middle-income
americans have been buried they're
just being crushed middle-income
americans have seen their income come
down by 4,300 this is a this is a
tax in and of itself
i'll call it the economy tax it's been
crushing at the same time gasoline prices
have doubled under the president
electric rates are up food prices are up
health care costs have gone up by 2,500
a family middle-income families are
being crushed and so the question is how
to get them going again and i've
described it it's energy and trade the
right kind of training programs
balancing our budget and helping small
business those are the the cornerstones of
my plan but the president mentioned a
couple of other ideas i'll just note
first education i agree education is key
particularly the future of our economy
but our training programs right now we've
got forty-seven of them housed in the federal
government reporting to eight different
agencies overhead is overwhelming we've got
to get those dollars back to the states
and go to the workers so they can create
their own pathways to get in the
training they need for jobs that will
really help them
the second area taxation we agree we ought
to bring the tax rates down and i do
both for corporations and for
individuals but in order for us not
to lose revenue have the government
run out of money i also lower deductions
and credits and exemptions so that we
keep taking in the same money when you
also account for growth the third area
energy energy is critical and the
president pointed out correctly that
production of oil and gas in the u.s is
up but not due to his policies in spite
of his policies mr president all of the
increase in natural gas and oil has
happened on private land not on
government land on government land your
administration has cut the number of
permits and licenses in half if i'm
president i'll double them and also get
the the oil from offshore and alaska and
i'll bring that pipeline in from canada
and by the way i like coal i'm going to
make sure we can continue to burn clean
coal people in the coal industry feel
like it's getting crushed by your
policies i want to get america and north
america energy independent so we can
create those jobs and finally with
regards to that tax cut look i'm not
looking to cut massive taxes and to
reduce the the revenues going to the
government my my number-one principal is
there'll be no tax cut that adds to the
deficit i want to underline that no tax cut
that adds to the deficit but i do want
to reduce the burden being paid by
middle-income americans and i and
to do that that also means i cannot
reduce the burden paid by high-income
americans so any any language to the
contrary is simply not accurate mr president well i
think let's talk about taxes because i
think it's instructive now four years
ago when i stood on this stage i said
that i would cut taxes for middle-class
families and that's exactly what i did
we cut taxes for middle-class families
by about 3,600 and the reason is
because i believe that we do best when
the middle class is doing well and by
giving them those tax cuts they had a
little more money in their pocket and so
maybe they can buy a new car they are
certainly in a better position to
weather the extraordinary recession that
we went through they can buy a
computer for their kid who's going off
to college which means they're spending
more money businesses have more
customers businesses make more
profits and then hire more workers now
governor romney's proposal that he has
been promoting for 18 months calls for a
five trillion dollar tax cut on top of
two trillion dollars of additional
spending for our military and he is
saying that he is going to pay for it by
closing loopholes and deductions the
problem is that he's been asked
over a hundred times how you would close
those deductions and loopholes and he
hasn't been able to identify them but
i'm going to make an important point here
jim when you add up all the loopholes
and deductions that upper-income
individuals can are currently taking
advantage of you take those all away you
don't come close to paying for five
trillion dollars in tax cuts and two
trillion dollars in additional military
spending and that's why independent
studies looking at this said the only
way to meet governor romney's pledge of
not reducing the deficit or or or not adding
to the deficit is by burdening
middle-class families the average
middle-class family with children would
pay about 2,000 more now that's not my
analysis that's the analysis of
economists who have looked at this and
and that kind of top top-down
economics where folks at the top are
doing well so the average person making
three million bucks is getting a
250,000 tax break
while middle-class families are burdened
further that's not what i believe is a
recipe for economic growth all right what is the
difference let's just stay on taxes just let's just stay on taxes for what is the difference well but but virtually virtually everything he just
said about my tax plan is inaccurate all
right so if the tax plan he
described were a tax plan i was asked to
support i'd say absolutely not i'm not
looking for a five trillion dollar tax
cut what i've said is i won't put in
place a tax cut that adds to the deficit
that's part one so there's no economist
can say mitt romney's tax plan adds
five trillion if i say i will not add to
the deficit with my tax plan number two
i will not reduce the share paid by
high-income individuals i know that you
and your running mate keep saying that and i
know it's a popular thing to say with a
lot of people but it's just not the case
look i've got five boys i'm used to people
saying something that's not always true but
just keep on repeating it and ultimately
hoping i'll believe it but that that is
not the case all right i will not reduce
the taxes paid by high-income americans
and number three i will not under any
circumstances raise taxes on
middle-income families i will lower
taxes on middle-income families
now you cite a study there are six
other studies that looked at the study
you described and say it's completely
wrong i saw a study that came out today
that said you're going to raise taxes by
three to four thousand dollars on
middle-income families there are all
these studies out there but let's get at
the bottom line that is i want to bring
down rates i want to bring the rates
down at the same time lower deductions
and exemptions and credits and so forth so
we keep getting the revenue we need and
you'd think well then why lower the rates
and the reason is because small business
pays that individual rate fifty-four
percent of america's workers work in
businesses that are taxed not at the
corporate tax rate but at the individual
tax rate and if we lower that rate they
will be able to hire more people for me
this is about jobs this is about
getting jobs for the american people
that's where we started yeah do you challenge what the
governor just said about his own
plan well for 18 months he's been
running on this tax plan and now five
weeks before the election he's saying that
his big bold idea is never mind and the
fact is that if you are lowering the
rates the way you described governor then
it is not possible to come up with
enough deductions and loopholes that
only affect high-income individuals to
avoid either raising the deficit or
burdening the middle class it's it's
math it's arithmetic now governor romney
and i do share a deep interest in
encouraging small-business growth so at
the same time that my tax plan has
already lowered taxes for 98 percent of
families i also lowered taxes for small
businesses 18 times and what i want to
do is continue the tax rates the tax
cuts that we put into place for small
businesses and families
but i have said that for incomes over
250,000 a year that we should go back
to the rates that we had when bill
clinton was president when we created 23
million new jobs went from deficit to
surplus and created a whole lot of
millionaires to boot and the reason this
is important is because by doing that we
can not only reduce the deficit we can
not only encourage job growth through
small businesses but we're also able to
make the investments that are necessary
in education or in energy and we do have
a difference though when it comes to
definitions of small business now under
under my plan 97 percent of small businesses
would not see their income taxes go up
governor romney says well those top 3
percent they're the job creators they'd be
burdened but under governor romney's
definition there are a whole bunch of
millionaires and billionaires who are
small businesses donald trump is a small
business and i know donald trump doesn't
like to think of himself as small
anything but but that's how you define
small businesses if you're getting
business income and that kind of
approach i believe will not grow our
economy because the only way to pay for
it without either burdening the middle
class or blowing up our deficit is to
make drastic cuts in things like
education making sure that we are
continuing to invest in basic science and
research all the things that are helping
america grow and i think that would be a
mistake all right jim let me just come
back on that on that point which is these just for the just for record the small businesses we're talking about excuse me excuse me just so everybody
understands we're way over our
first 15 minutes it's fun isn't it it's ok
it's great no problem as long as you
all don't have you don't have a problem i
don't have a problem because we're still
on the economy we're going to come back
to taxes i want to move on to the
deficit and a lot of other things too
ok but go ahead sir you bet well
president you're mr president you're
absolutely right which is that with
regards to 97 percent of the businesses are not
not taxed at the 35 percent tax rate they're
taxed at a lower rate but those
businesses that are in the last three
percent of businesses happen to employ
half half of all the people who work in
small business those are the businesses
that employ one-quarter of all the
workers in america and your plan is to
take their tax rate from 35 percent to 40 percent now
i talked to a guy who has a very small
business he's in the electronics
business in in st louis he has four
employees he said he and his son
calculated how much they pay in taxes
federal income tax federal payroll tax
state income tax state sales tax state
property tax gasoline tax it added up to
well over 50 percent of what they earned and
your plan is to take the tax rate on
successful small businesses from 35 percent to
40 percent the national federation of
independent businesses has said that
will cost 700,000 jobs i don't want to
cost jobs my priority is jobs and so
what i do is i bring down the tax rates
lower deductions and exemptions the same
idea behind bowles-simpson by the way
get the rates down lower deductions and
exemptions to create more jobs because
there's nothing better for getting us to
a balanced budget than having more
people working earning more money paying
more taxes that's by far the most
effective and efficient way to get this
budget balanced jim i you may want to move
on to another topic but i i would just say
this to the american people if you
believe that we can cut taxes by five
trillion dollars and add two trillion
dollars in additional spending that the
military is not asking for seven
trillion dollars just to give you a
sense over ten years that's more than
our entire defense budget and you think
that by closing loopholes and deductions
for the well-to-do somehow you will not
end up picking up the tab then
governor romney's plan may work for you
but i think math common sense and our
history shows us that's not a recipe for
job growth look we've tried this we've
tried both approaches the approach that
governor romney's talking about is the
same sales pitch that was made in 2001
and 2003 and we ended up with the
slowest job growth
in 50 years we ended up moving from surplus
to deficits and it all culminated in the
worst financial crisis since the great
depression bill clinton tried the approach that
i'm talking about we created 23 million
new jobs
we went from deficit to surplus and
businesses did very well so in some ways
we've got some data on which approach is
more likely to create jobs and
opportunity for americans and i believe
that the economy works best when
middle-class families are getting tax
breaks so that they've got some money in
their pockets and those of us who have
done extraordinarily well because of
this magnificent country that we live in
that we can afford to do a little bit
more to make sure we're not blowing up
the deficit jim the president began this
segment so i think i get the last word
well you're going to get the first word in the next segment but he gets
the first word of that segment i get the
last word i hope let me just
make this comment i think first of all let me let me repeat let me
repeat what i said i'm not in favor of a
five trillion dollar tax cut that's not
my plan my plan is not to put in place
any tax cut that will add to the deficit
that's point one so you may keep
referring to it as a five trillion
dollar tax cut but that's not my plan
number two let's look at history my
plan is not like anything that's been
tried before my plan is to bring down
rates but also bring down deductions and
exemptions and credits at the same time
so the revenue stays in but that we
bring down rates to get more people
working my priority is putting people
back to work in america they're
suffering in this country and we talk
about evidence look at the evidence of
the last four years it's absolutely
extraordinary we've got 23 million
people out of work or stopped looking for
work in this country it's just it's
we've got when the president took
office 32 million people on food stamps
47 million on food stamps today economic
growth this year slower than last year
and last year slower than the year before
going forward with the status quo
is not going to cut it for the american
people who are struggling today all
right let's talk we're still on the
economy this is theoretically now a
second segment still on the economy and
specifically on what to do about the federal deficit
the federal debt and the question you
each have two minutes on this and governor
romney you you go first because
the president went first on segment one and
the question is this what are the
differences between the two of you as to
how you would go about tackling the
deficit problem in this country
good i'm glad you raised that and it's a
it's a critical issue i think it's not
just an economic issue
i think it's a moral issue i think it's
frankly not moral for my generation to
keep spending massively more than we
take in knowing those burdens are going
to be passed on to the next generation
and they're going to be paying the
interest and the principal all their
lives and the amount of debt we're
adding at a trillion a year is simply
not moral so how do we deal with it well
mathematically there are three ways that
you can cut a deficit one of course
is to raise taxes number two is
to cut spending and number three is to
grow the economy because if more people
work in a growing economy they're paying
taxes and you can get the job done that
way the president's would president would
prefer raising taxes i understand the
problem with raising taxes is that it
slows down the rate of growth and you
could never quite get the job done i
want to lower spending and encourage
economic growth at the same time what
things would i cut from spending well
first of all i will eliminate all
programs by this test if they don't pass
it is the program so critical it's worth
borrowing money from china to pay for it
and if not i'll get rid of it
obamacare's on my list i apologize mr
president i use that term with all
respect i like it good so i'll
get rid of that i'm sorry jim i'm going to
stop the subsidy to pbs i'm going to stop
other things i like pbs i love big bird
actually like you too but i'm not going to
i'm not going to keep on spending money on
things to borrow money from china to pay
for that's number one number two i'll
take programs that are currently good
programs but i think could be run more
efficiently at the state level and send
them to the state number three i'll make
government more efficient and to cut
back the number of employees combine
some agencies and departments my
cutbacks will be done through attrition
by the way this is the approach we have
to take to get america to a balanced
budget the president said he'd cut the
deficit in half
unfortunately he doubled it
trillion-dollar deficits for the last
four years the president's put it in
place as much public debt almost as much
debt held by the public as all prior
presidents combined mr president two
minutes when i walked into the oval
office i had more than a trillion dollar
deficit greeting me and we know where it
came from two wars that were paid for on
a credit card two tax cuts that were not
paid for and a whole bunch of programs
that were not paid for and then a
massive economic crisis and despite that
what we've said is yes we had to take
some initial emergency measures to make
sure we didn't slip into a great
depression but what we've also said is
let's make sure that we are cutting out
those things that are not helping us
grow so 77 government programs
everything from aircrafts that the air
force had ordered but weren't working
very well 18 government 18 government
programs for education that were
well-intentioned but weren't helping
kids learn we went after medical fraud
in medicare and medicaid very
aggressively more aggressively than ever
before and have saved tens of billions
of dollars 50 billion dollars of waste
taken out of the system and i worked
with democrats and republicans to cut a
trillion dollars out of our
discretionary domestic budget that's the
largest cut in the discretionary
domestic budget since dwight eisenhower
now we all know that we've got to do
more and so i've put forward a specific
four trillion dollar deficit reduction
plan it's on a website you can look at
all the numbers what cuts we make and
what revenue we raise and the way
we do it is two dollars and 50 cents for
every cut we ask for a dollar of
additional revenue paid for as i
indicated earlier by asking those of us
who have done very well in this country
to contribute a little bit more to
reduce the deficit
governor romney earlier mentioned
the bowles-simpson commission well
that's how the commission bipartisan
commission that talked about how we
should move forward suggested we have to
do it in a balanced way with
some revenue and some spending cuts and
this is a major difference that governor
romney and i have let let me just finish
this point because you're looking
for contrast
you know when governor romney stood on a
stage with other republican candidates
for the nomination
and he was asked would you take 10 of
spending cuts for just one dollar of
revenue and he said no now if you take
such an unbalanced approach then that
means you are going to be gutting our
investments in schools and education it
means that governor romney talked about
medicaid and how we could send it
back to the states but effectively this
means a 30 percent cut in the primary program
we help for seniors who are in nursing
homes for kids who are with disabilities
mr president i'm sorry and and that is not a right
strategy for us to move forward way over
the two minutes sorry governor what
about simpson-bowles will you support
simpson-bowles simpson-bowles the
president should have grabbed that no i
mean do you support simpson-bowles i
have my own plan it's not the same as
simpson-bowles but in my view the
president should have grabbed it if he
wanted to make some adjustments to it take
it go to congress fight for it that's
what we've done made some adjustments to
it and we're putting it forward before
congress right now a four trillion dollar
plan but you've been president four years you've been
president four years you said you'd cut the
deficit in half it's now four years
later we still have trillion-dollar
deficits the cbo says we'll have a
trillion-dollar deficit each of the next
four years if you're re-elected we'll
get to a trillion-dollar debt
i mean you have said before you'd cut the deficit
in half and this i love this
idea of four trillion in cuts you found
four trillion dollars of ways to reduce
or to get closer to a balanced budget
except we still show trillion-dollar
deficits every year that doesn't get the
job done let me come back and say why is
it that i don't want to raise taxes
why don't i want to raise taxes on
people and actually you said it
back in 2010 you said look i'm going to
extend the tax policies that we have now
i'm not going to raise taxes on anyone
because when the economy is growing slow
like this when we're in recession you
shouldn't raise taxes on anyone well the
economy is still growing slow as a
matter of fact it's growing much more
slowly now than when you made that
statement and so if you believe the same thing you
just don't want to raise taxes on people
and the reality is it's not just wealthy
people you mentioned donald trump it's
not just donald trump you're taxing it's
all those businesses that employ one-quarter of the
workers in america these small
businesses that are taxed as individuals
you raise taxes and you kill jobs
that's why the national federation of
independent businesses said your plan
will kill 700,000 jobs i don't want to
kill jobs in this environment i'll make
one more point answer the taxes thing for
a moment ok mr president well we've had this
discussion before about the idea that in order
to reduce the deficit there
has to be revenue in addition to cuts
there has to be revenue in addition to
cuts now governor romney has ruled out
revenue he's ruled out revenue absolutely
look the revenue i get is by more
people working getting higher pay paying
more taxes that's how we get growth
and how we balance the budget but the
idea of taxing people more putting more
people out of work you'll never get
there you'll never balance the budget by
raising taxes spain spain spends
42 percent of their total economy on
government we're now spending 42 percent
of our economy on government i don't
want to go down the path to spain i
want to go down the path of growth that
puts americans to work with more money
coming in because they're working but
but mr president you're saying in order to to get
the job done it's got to be balanced you've got to have if if
we're serious we've got to take a
balanced responsible approach and by the
way this is not just when it comes to
individual taxes let's talk about
corporate taxes now i've identified
areas where we can right away make a
change that i believe would actually
help the economy the oil industry gets
four billion dollars a year in corporate
welfare basically they get deductions
that those small businesses that
governor romney refers to they don't
get now does anybody think that
exxonmobil needs some extra money when
they're making money every time you go
to the pump why wouldn't we want to
eliminate that
why wouldn't we eliminate
tax breaks for corporate jets my
attitude is if you got a corporate jet
you can probably afford to pay full
freight not get a special break for it
when it comes to corporate taxes
governor romney has said he wants to in
a revenue-neutral way close loopholes
deductions he hasn't identified which ones they are
but that thereby bring down the
corporate rate well i want to do the
same thing but i've actually identified
how we can do that and part of the way
to do it is to not give tax breaks to
companies that are shipping jobs
overseas right now you can actually take
a deduction for moving a plant overseas
i think most americans would say that
doesn't make sense and all that raises
revenue and so if we take a balanced
approach what that then allows us to do
is also to help young people the way we
already have during my administration
make sure that they can afford to go to
college it means that the teacher that i
met in las vegas a wonderful young lady
who describes to me
she's got 42 kids in her class the first
two weeks she's got them some of them
sitting on the floor until finally they
get reassigned they're using textbooks
that are 10 years old that is not a
recipe for growth that's not how america
was built and so budgets reflect choices
ultimately we're going to have to make some
decisions and if we're asking for no
revenue then that means that we've got
to get rid of a whole bunch of stuff and
the magnitude of the tax cuts that
you're talking about governor would end
up resulting in severe hardship for
people but more importantly would not
help us grow as i indicated before when
you talk about shifting medicaid to
states we're talking about potentially a
30 a 30 percent cut in medicaid over
time now you know that may not seem like
a big deal when it just is you
know numbers on a sheet of paper but if
we're talking about a family who's got
an autistic kid and is depending on
that medicaid that's a big problem and
governors are creative there's no doubt
about it but they're not creative enough
to make up for 30 percent of revenue
on something like medicaid what ends up
happening is some people end up not
getting help jim let's we've gone on a
lot of topics there and so it's going to take
a minute to go from medicaid to schools
come back to medicaid to oil to tax breaks then companies going
overseas so let's go through them one by
one first of all the department of
energy has said the tax break for oil
companies is 2.8 billion dollars a year
and it's actually an accounting
treatment as you know that's been in
place for a hundred years now it's time to
end it and in one year you provided 90
billion dollars in breaks to the green
energy world now i like green energy as
well but that's about 50 years worth of
what oil and gas receives and you say
exxon and mobil actually this 2.8
billion dollars goes largely to small
companies to drilling operators and so
forth but you know if we get that tax
rate from 35 percent down to 25 percent why that 2.8
billion dollars is on the table of
course it's on the table that's probably
not going to survive you get that rate
down to 25 percent but don't forget you put
90 billion dollars like 50 years worth
of breaks into into solar and wind to
solyndra and fisker and
tesla and ener1 i mean i had a
friend who said you don't just pick the
winners and losers you pick the losers
all right so this this is not this is not the
kind of policy you want to have if you want
to get america energy secure the second
topic which is you said you get a
deduction for taking a plant overseas
look i've been in business for 25 years
i have no idea what you're talking about
i maybe need to get a new accountant but
but the idea that you get a break for
shipping jobs overseas is simply not the
case what we do have right now is a
setting where i'd like to bring money
from overseas back to this country
and finally medicaid to states i'm not
quite sure where that came in except
this which is i would like to take the
medicaid dollars that go to states and say
to a state you're going to get what you got
last year plus inflation
plus 1 percent and then you're going to manage
your care for your poor in the way you
think best and i remember as a governor
when this idea was floated by tommy
thompson the governors republican and
democrats said please let us do that we
can care for our own poor in so much
better and more effective a way than having the
federal government tell us how to care
for our poor so so let's state one
of the magnificent things about this
country is the whole idea that states
are the laboratories of democracy don't
have the federal government tell
everybody what kind of training programs
they have to have and what kind of
medicaid they have to have let states do
this and by the way if a state gets
in trouble well we could step in and see
if we can find a way to help them let's
go but but the right the right approach
is one which relies on the brilliance of
our people and states not the federal
government and we're going on
still on the economy on another but another
part of it ok all right all right this
is segment three the economy
entitlements first first answer goes to
you two minutes mr president do you see
a major difference between the two of
you on social security
you know i suspect that on social
security we've got a somewhat similar
position social security is structurally
sound it's going to have to be tweaked the
way it was by ronald reagan and speaker
democratic speaker tip o'neill but it is
the basic structure is sound but but i
want to talk about the values behind
social security and medicare and then
talk about medicare because that's the
big driver of our deficits right now my
grandmother some of you know helped to raise me my
grandparents did my grandfather died a
while back my grandmother died three
days before i was elected president and
she was fiercely independent she worked
her way up only had a high school
education started as a secretary ended
up being the vice president of a local bank
and she ended up living alone by choice
and the reason she could be independent
was because of social security and
medicare she had worked all her life put
in this money and understood that there
was a basic guarantee a floor under
which she could not go and that's the
perspective i bring when i think about
what's called entitlements you know
the name itself implies some sense of
dependency on the part of these folks
these are folks who've worked hard like
my grandmother and there are millions of people
out there who are counting on this
so my approach is to say how do we
strengthen the system over the long term
and in medicare what we did was we said
we are going to have to bring down the
costs if we're going to deal with our
long-term deficits but to do that let's
look where some of the money's going
716 billion dollars we were able to save
from the medicare program by no longer
overpaying insurance companies by making
sure that we weren't overpaying
providers and using that money we were
actually able to lower prescription drug
costs for seniors by an average of 600
and we were also able to make a make a
significant dent in providing them the
kind of preventive care that will
ultimately save money through the
throughout the system
so the way for us to deal with medicare
in particular is to lower health care
costs when it comes to social security
as i said you don't need a major
structural change in order to make sure
that social security is there for the
future we'll follow up on this first
governor romney you have two minutes on
social security and entitlements well
jim our seniors depend on these programs
and i know anytime we talk about
entitlements people become concerned
that something's going to happen that's
going to change their life for the worse
and the answer is neither the president
nor i are proposing any changes for any
current retirees or near retirees either
to social security or medicare so if
you're 60 or around 60 or older you
don't need to listen any further but for
younger people we need to talk about
what changes are going to be occurring
oh i just thought about one and that is
in fact i was wrong when i said the
president isn't proposing any changes
for current retirees in fact he is on
medicare on social security he's not but
on medicare for current retirees he's
cutting 716 billion dollars from the
program now he says by not overpaying
hospitals and providers actually just
going to them and saying we're going to
reduce the rates you get paid
across the board everybody's going to
get a lower rate that's not just going
after places where there's abuse that's
saying we're cutting the rates some 15
percent of hospitals and nursing homes say they
won't take any more medicare patients
under that scenario we also have 50 percent of
doctors who say they
won't take more medicare patients this we have
four million people on medicare
advantage that will lose medicare
advantage because of those 716 billion
dollars in cuts i can't understand how
you can cut medicare 716 billion dollars
for current recipients of medicare now
you point out well we're putting some
back we're going to give a better prescription
program that's one of that's one dollar
for every 15 you've cut they're smart
enough to know that's not a good trade i
want to take that 716 billion dollars
you've cut and put it back into medicare
by the way we can include a prescription
program if we need to improve it but the
idea of cutting 716 billion dollars from
medicare to be able to balance the
additional cost of obamacare is in my
opinion a mistake
and with regards to young people coming
along i've got proposals to make sure
medicare and social security are there
for them without any question mr president first of
all i think it's important for governor
romney to present this plan that he says
will only affect folks in the future and
the essence of the plan is that you
would turn medicare into a voucher
program it's called premium support but
it's understood to be a voucher program
his running mate and you don't support
that i don't and let me explain why
again that's for future i understand
people right not for current retirees for so
if you're if you're 54 or 55 you might
want to listen because this this will
affect you the idea which was originally
presented by congressman ryan your
running mate is that we would give a
voucher to seniors and they could go out
in the private marketplace and buy their
own health insurance the problem is that
because the voucher wouldn't necessarily
keep up with health care inflation it
was estimated that this would cost the
average senior about 6,000 a year now
in fairness what governor romney has now
said is he'll maintain traditional
medicare alongside it but there's still
a problem because what happens is those
insurance companies are pretty clever at
figuring out who are the younger
and healthier seniors they recruit them
leaving the older sicker seniors in
medicare and every health care economist
who looks at it says over time what'll
happen is the traditional medicare
system will collapse and then what
you've got is folks like my grandmother
at the mercy of the private insurance
system precisely at the time when they
are most in need of decent health care
so i don't think vouchers are the right
way to go and this is not my only my
opinion aarp thinks that the the savings that we
obtained from medicare bolstered the
system lengthened the medicare trust
fund by eight years benefits were not
affected at all and ironically if you
repeal obamacare and i have become fond
of this term obamacare if you repeal it
what happens is those seniors right away
are going to be paying 600 more in
prescription care they're now going to have
to be paying co-pays for basic checkups
that can keep them healthier and the
primary beneficiary of that repeal are
insurance companies that are estimated to gain
billions of dollars back when they
aren't making seniors any healthier and
i don't think that's the right approach
when it comes to making sure that
medicare is stronger over the long term
we'll talk about specifically about
health care in a moment but what do you
support the voucher system governor what
i support is no change for current
retirees and near-retirees to medicare
and the president supports taking 716
billion dollars out of that program and what about the vouchers so
that's that's number one number two is
for people coming along that are young
what i do to make sure that we can keep
medicare in place for them is to allow
them either to choose the current
medicare program or a private plan their
choice they get to choose and they'll have at
least two plans that will be entirely at
no cost to them so they don't have to pay
additional money no additional 6,000
that's not going to happen they'll have
at least two plans and by the way if the
government can be as efficient as the
private sector and offer premiums that
are as low as the private sector people
will be happy to get traditional
medicare or they'll be able to get a
private plan i know my own view is i'd rather
have a private plan i'd just as soon not
have the government telling me what kind
of health care i get i'd rather be able
to have an insurance company if i don't
like them i can get rid of them and find
a different insurance company but people
make their own choice the other thing we
have to do to save medicare we have to
have the benefits high for those that
are low income but for higher income
people we're going to have to lower some of
the benefits we have to make sure this
program is there for the long term
that's the plan that i've put forward and by
the way the idea came not even from paul
ryan or or senator wyden who's the co-author
of the bill with with paul ryan in the
senate but also it came from bill
bill clinton's chief of staff
this is an idea that's been around a
long time which is saying hey let's see
if we can't get competition into the
medicare world so that people can get
the choice of different plans at lower
cost better quality i believe in
competition jim if i if i can just respond very
quickly first of all every study has
shown that medicare has lower
administrative costs than private
insurance does which is why seniors are
generally pretty happy with it and
private insurers have to make a profit
nothing wrong with that that's what
they do
and so you've got higher administrative
costs plus profit on top of that and if
you are going to save any money through
what governor romney's proposing what
has to happen is is that the money has
to come from somewhere and when you move
to a voucher system you are putting
seniors at the mercy of those insurance
companies and over time if traditional
medicare has decayed or fallen apart
then they're stuck and this is the
reason why aarp has said that your plan
would weaken medicare substantially and
that's why they were supportive of the
approach that we took one last
point i want to make we do have to lower
the cost of health care not just in
medicare and medicaid but but but
overall ok and so that's that's a
big topic can we can we stay on medicare is that a is that a separate topic yeah we're going to yeah i want to get to it i'm sorry but all i want to do is go very quickly let's get back to medicare before we leave the economy let's get back to medicare the
president said that the government can
provide the
service at lower cost and without a
profit all right if that's the case then
it will always be the best product that
people can purchase wait a minute governor but my experience
my experience is the private sector
typically is able to provide a better
product at a lower cost can we can the
two of you agree that the voters have a
choice a clear choice between the two of you on
medicare absolutely absolutely all right so to finish quickly
briefly on the economy what is your view
about the level of federal regulation of
the economy right now is there too much
and in your case mr president is there
should there be more beginning with you
this is not a new two-minute segment
to start and we'll go for a few
minutes and then we're going to go to
health care ok regulation is essential
you can't have a free market work if you
don't have regulation as a
businessperson i had to have i
need to know the regulations i needed
them there
you couldn't have people opening up
banks in their in their garage and
making loans i mean you have to have
regulations so that you can have an
economy work every free economy has
good regulation at the same time regulation
can become excessive is it excessive
now do you think in some places yes like where other places no no it can
become out-of-date
and what's happened with some of the
legislation that's been passed during
the president's term you've seen
regulation become excessive and it's
hurt it's hurt the economy let me
give you an example dodd-frank was
passed and it includes within it a
number of provisions that i think has
some unintended consequences that are
harmful to the economy one is it
designates a number of banks as too big
to fail and they're effectively
guaranteed by the federal government
this is the biggest kiss that's been
given to to new york banks i've ever seen
this is an enormous boon for them
there've been 122 community and small
banks have closed since dodd frank so
there's one example here's another in
dodd-frank do you want to repeal
dodd-frank well i would repeal it and
replace it we're not going to get
rid of all regulation you have to have
regulation and there are some parts of
dodd-frank that make all the sense in
the world you need transparency you need
to have leverage limits for well here's a
specific but let's let's mention let me mention the other one let's
talk no let's not let's let him
respond let's let him respond to this specific on
dodd-frank and what the governor just
said well i think this is a great
example the reason we have been in such
a enormous economic crisis was
prompted by reckless behavior across the
board now it wasn't just on wall street
you had loan officers were that were
giving loans and mortgages that really
shouldn't have been given because
the folks didn't qualify you
had people who were borrowing money to
buy a house that they couldn't afford
you had credit agencies that were
stamping these as a1 great
investments when they weren't but you
also had banks making money hand over
fist churning out products that the
bankers themselves didn't even
understand in order to make big profits
but knowing that it made the entire
system vulnerable so what did we do we
stepped in and had the toughest reforms
on wall street since the 1930s we said
you've got banks you've got to raise your
capital requirements you can't engage in
some of this risky behavior that is
putting main street at risk we're gonna
make sure that you've got to have a
living will so so we can know how you're
going to wind things down if you make a bad
bet so we don't have other taxpayer
bailouts in the meantime by the way we
also made sure that all the help that we
provided those banks it appears we've got some
agreement that a marketplace to work has
to have some regulation but in the past
governor romney has said he just wants to
repeal dodd-frank roll it back and so
the question is does anybody out there
think that the big problem we had is
that there was too much oversight and
regulation of wall street because if you
do then governor romney is your
candidate but that's not what i believe
sorry but that's just not that's just not the facts
look we have to have regulation on wall
street that's why i'd have
regulation but i wouldn't designate five
banks as too big to fail and give them a
blank check that's one of the unintended
consequences of dodd-frank it wasn't
thought through properly we need to get
rid of that provision because it's
killing regional and
small banks they're getting hurt let me
mention another regulation in dodd-frank
you say we were giving mortgages to
people who weren't qualified it's
exactly right it's one of the reasons
for the great financial calamity we had
and so dodd-frank correctly says we need
to have qualified mortgages and if you
give a mortgage that's not qualified
there are big penalties except they didn't
ever go on and define what a
qualified mortgage was it's been two years
we don't know what a qualified mortgage is
yet so banks are reluctant to make loans
mortgages try and get a mortgage these
days it's hurt the housing market
because dodd-frank didn't anticipate
putting in place the kinds of
regulations you have to have it's not
that dodd-frank always was wrong with too
much regulation sometimes they didn't
come out with a clear regulation i
will make sure we don't hurt the
functioning of our of our marketplace
and our businesses because i want to
bring back housing and get good jobs all right i
think we have another clear difference
between the two of you now let's move to
health care where i know there is a clear
difference and that has to do with the
affordable care act obamacare and it's a
two-minute new new segment and that
means two minutes each and you go first
governor romney you want it repealed you
want the affordable care act repealed
why i sure do well in part it comes
again from my experience i was in new
hampshire a woman came to me and she
said look i can't afford insurance for
myself or my son
i met a couple in appleton wisconsin and
they said we're thinking of dropping our
insurance we can't afford it and the
number of small businesses i've gone to
that are saying they're dropping
insurance because they can't afford it
the cost of health care is just
prohibitive and and we've got to deal with cost
and unfortunately when when when you look at
obamacare the congressional budget
office has said it will cost 2,500 a
year more than traditional insurance so
it's adding to cost and as a matter of
fact when the president ran for office
he said that by this year he would have
brought down the cost of insurance for
each family by two thousand five hundred dollars
a family instead it's gone up by that
amount so it's expensive expensive things hurt
families so that's one reason i don't
want it second reason it cuts 716
billion dollars from medicare to pay for
it i want to put that money back in
medicare for our seniors number three it
puts in place an unelected board that's
going to tell people ultimately what kind
of treatments they can have i don't like
that idea fourth there was a survey done
of small businesses across the country
said what's been the effect of obamacare
on your hiring plans and three-quarters
of them said it makes us less likely
to hire people i just don't know how the
president could have come into office
facing 23 million people out of work
rising unemployment an economic crisis
at the at the kitchen table and spend
his energy and passion for two years
fighting for obamacare instead of
fighting for jobs for the american
people it has killed jobs and the best
course for health care is to do what we
did in my state craft a plan at the
state level that fits the needs of the
state and then let's focus on getting
the costs down for people rather than
raising it with the 2,500 additional
premium mr president the argument
against repeal well four years ago when
i was running for office i was traveling
around and having those same
conversations that governor romney talks
about and it wasn't just that small
businesses were seeing costs skyrocket
and they couldn't get affordable
coverage even if they wanted to provide
it to their employees it wasn't just
that this was the biggest driver of our
federal deficit our overall health care
costs but it was families who were
worried about going bankrupt if they got
sick millions of families all across the
country if they had a pre-existing
condition they might not be able to get
coverage at all if they did have
coverage insurance companies might
impose an arbitrary limit and so as a
consequence they're paying their
premiums somebody gets really sick
lo and behold they don't have enough
money to pay the bills because the
insurance companies say that they've hit
the limit so we did work on this
alongside working on jobs because this
is part of making sure that middle-class
families are secure in this country
and let me tell you exactly what
obamacare did number one if you've got
health insurance it doesn't mean a
government takeover you keep your own
insurance you keep your own doctor but
it does say insurance companies can't
jerk you around
they can't impose arbitrary lifetime
limits they have to let you keep your
kid on their insurance your insurance
plan until you're 26 years old and it
also says that you're going to have to get
rebates if insurance companies are
spending more on administrative costs
and profits than they are on actual care
number two if you don't have health
insurance we're essentially setting up a
group plan that allows you to benefit
from group rates that are typically
eighteen percent lower than if you're
out there trying to get insurance on the
individual market now the last point i'd
make before two minutes two minutes is up sir no i think i had five seconds
before you interrupted me was the irony
is that we've seen this model work
really well in massachusetts because
governor romney did a good thing working
with democrats in the state to set up
what is essentially the identical model
and as a consequence people are covered
there it hasn't destroyed jobs and as a
consequence we now have a system in
which we have the opportunity to start
bringing down costs as opposed to just
leaving millions of people out in the
cold your five seconds went away a long time ago all right
governor governor tell tell the
president directly why you think what
he just said is wrong about obamacare well i did with
my first
statement but i'll go on please elaborate i'll elaborate exactly right first of all i like the
way we did it in massachusetts i like
the fact that in my state we had
republicans and democrats come together
and work together what you did instead
was to push through a plan without a
single republican vote
as a matter of fact when massachusetts
did something quite extraordinary
elected a republican senator to stop
obamacare you pushed it through anyway
so entirely on a partisan basis instead
of bringing america together and having
a discussion on this important topic you
pushed through something that you and
nancy pelosi and harry reid thought was
the best answer and drove it through
what we did in a legislature 87 percent
democrat we worked together 200
legislators in my legislature only two
voted against the plan by the time we
were finished what were some differences
we didn't raise taxes you've raised them
by a trillion dollars under obamacare we
didn't cut medicare of course we don't
have medicare but we didn't cut medicare
by 716 billion dollars we didn't put in
place a board that can tell people
ultimately what treatments they're going to
receive we didn't also do
something that i think a number of
people across this country recognize
which is put put people in a position
where they're going to lose the insurance
they had and they wanted right now the
cbo says up to 20 million people will
lose their insurance as obamacare goes
into effect next year and likewise a
study by mckinsey and company of
american businesses said 30 percent of
them are anticipating dropping people
from coverage so for those reasons for
the tax for medicare for this board and
for people losing their insurance this
is why the american people don't want
medicare don't want obamacare it's why
republicans said do not do this and the
republicans had had the plan they put a
plan out they put out a plan a bipartisan
plan it was swept aside i think
something this big this important has to
be done on a bipartisan basis and we
have to have a president who can reach
across the aisle and fashion important
legislation with the input from both
parties governor romney said this has to
be done on a bipartisan basis this was a
bipartisan idea in fact it was a
republican idea and governor romney at
the beginning of this debate wrote and
said what we did in massachusetts could
be a model for the nation and i agree
that the democratic legislators in
massachusetts might have given some
advice to republicans in congress about
how to cooperate but the fact of the
matter is we used the same advisers and
they say it's the same plan
it when governor romney talks about this
board for example unelected board that
we've created what this is is a group of
health care experts doctors etc to
figure out how can we reduce the cost of
care in the system overall because there
there are two ways of dealing with our health
care crisis one is to simply leave a
whole bunch of people uninsured and let
them fend for themselves
to let businesses figure out how long
they can continue to pay premiums until
finally they just give up and their
workers are no longer getting insured
and that's been the trend line or
alternatively we can figure out how do
we make the cost of care more effective
and there are ways of doing it so at
cleveland clinic one of the best
healthcare systems in the world they
actually provide great care cheaper than
average and the reason they do is
because they do some smart things they
they say if a patient's coming in let's
get all the doctors together at once do
one test instead of having the patient
run around with ten tests let's make
sure that we're providing preventive
care so we're catching the onset of
something like diabetes let's let's pay
providers on the basis of performance as
opposed to on the basis of how many
procedures they've they've engaged in
now so what this board does is basically
identifies best practices and says let's
use the purchasing power of medicare and
medicaid to help to institutionalize all
these good things that we do and the
fact of the matter is that when
obamacare is fully implemented we're
going to be in a position to show that
costs are going down and over the last
two years health care premiums have gone
up it's true but they've gone up slower
than any time in the last 50 years so
we're already beginning to see progress
in the meantime folks out there with
insurance you're already getting a
rebate let me make one last point
governor romney says
we should replace it i'm just going to
repeal it but but we can replace it with
something but the problem is he hasn't
described what exactly we'd replace it
with other than saying we're going to leave
it to the states but the fact of the matter
is that some of the prescriptions that
he's offered like letting you buy
insurance across state lines there's no
indication that that somehow is going to
help somebody who's got a pre-existing
condition be able to finally buy insurance in fact
it's estimated that by repealing obamacare
you're looking at 50 million people
losing health insurance let's at a time when
it's vitally important let's let the
governor explain what you would do
well if obamacare is repealed how would you replace
it well actually it's it's it's a
lengthy description but
number one pre-existing conditions are
covered under my plan number two young
people are able to stay on their family
plan that's already offered in the
private marketplace you don't have to
have the government mandate that for
that to occur but let's come back to
something the president and i agree on which
is the key task we have in health
care is to get the cost down so it's
more affordable for families and
then he has as a model for doing that
a board of people at the government an
unelected board appointed board who are
going to decide what kind of treatment
you ought to have in my opinion the
government is not effective in in
bringing down the cost of almost
anything as a matter of fact free people
and free enterprises trying to find ways
to do things better are able to be more
effective in bringing down the cost than
the government will ever be your example
of the cleveland clinic is my case in
point along with several others i could
describe this is the private market
these are small these are
enterprises competing with each other
learning how to do better and better
jobs i used to consult to businesses
excuse me to hospitals and to health care
providers i was astonished at the
creativity and innovation that exists in
the american people in order to bring
the cost of health care down we don't
need to have a board of 15 people
telling us what kinds of treatments we
should have we instead need to put
insurance plans providers hospitals
doctors on target such that they have an
incentive as you say performance pay for
doing an excellent job for keeping costs
down and that's happening
innermountain healthcare does it
superbly well mayo clinic is doing it
superbly well cleveland clinic
others but the right answer is not to
have the federal government take over
health care and start mandating to the
providers across america telling a
patient and a doctor what kind of treatment they
can have that's the wrong way to go the
private market and individual
responsibility always work best let me
just point out first of all this board
that we're talking about can't make
decisions about what treatments are
given that's explicitly prohibited in
the law but let's go back to what
governor romney indicated that under his
plan he would be able to cover people
with pre-existing conditions
well actually governor that isn't what
your plan does what your plan does is to
duplicate what's already the law which
says if you are out of health
insurance for three months then you can
end up getting continuous coverage and
an insurance company can't deny you if
you've if it's been under 90 days but
that's already the law and that doesn't
help the millions of people out there with
pre-existing conditions there's a reason
why governor romney set up the plan that
he did in massachusetts it wasn't a
government takeover of health care it
was the largest expansion of private
insurance but what it does say is that
insurers you've got to take everybody
now that also means that you've got more
customers but when when governor romney says
that he'll replace it with something but
can't detail how it will be in fact
replaced and the reason he set up the
system he did in massachusetts was because
there isn't a better way of dealing with
the pre-existing conditions problem it
just reminds me of you know he says that
he's going to close deductions and
loopholes for his tax plan that's how
it's going to be paid for but we don't know
the details he says that he's going to
replace dodd-frank wall street reform
but we don't know exactly which ones he
won't tell us he now says he's going to
replace obamacare and assure that all
the good things that are in it are going to be
in there and you don't have to worry and
at some point i think the american
people have to ask themselves is the
reason that governor romney is keeping
all these plans to replace secret
because they're too good is it is it because
that somehow middle-class families are
going to benefit too much from them no the
reason is because when we reform wall
street when we tackle the problem of
pre-existing conditions then you know
these are tough problems and we've got
to make choices and the choices we've
made have been ones that ultimately are
benefiting middle-class families all
across the country we're going to move to
no i i have to respond to that no but which is
which is my experience as a governor is
if i come in and and lay down a piece of
legislation and say it's my way or the
highway i don't get a lot done what i do
is the same way that tip o'neill and
ronald reagan worked together some years
ago when ronald reagan ran for office he
laid out the principles that he was
going to foster he said he was going to lower
tax rates he said he was going to broaden
the base you've said the same thing
you're going to simplify the tax code
broaden the base those are my principles
i want to bring down the tax burden on
middle-income families and i'm going to
work together with congress to say ok what
what are the various ways we could bring
down deductions for instance one way for
instance would be to have a single
number make up a number twenty-five
thousand dollars fifty thousand dollars anybody
can have deductions up to that amount
and then that number disappears for
high-income people that's one way
one could do it one could follow
bowles-simpson as a model and take deduction by
deduction and make differences that way
there are alternatives to accomplish the
objective i have which is to bring down
rates broaden the base simplify the code
and create incentives for growth and
with regards to health care you had
remarkable details with regards to my
pre-existing condition plan you
obviously studied up on on my plan in
fact i do have a plan that deals with
people with pre-existing conditions
that's part of my health care plan and
what we did in massachusetts is a model
for the nation state by state and i said
that at that time the federal government
taking over health care for the entire
nation and whisking aside the tenth
amendment which gives states the rights
for these kinds of things is not the
course for america to have a stronger
more vibrant economy that is a terrific
segue to our next segment and is the
role of government
and and let's see role of government and
it is you are first on this mr
president and the question is this do
you believe both of you but you had the
first two minutes on this mr president
do you believe there's a fundamental
difference between the two of you as to
how you view the mission of the federal
government well i definitely think there
are differences and do you yeah the first role of the
federal government is to keep the
american people safe that's its most
basic function and as commander-in-chief
that is something that i've worked on
and thought about every single day that
i've been in the oval office but i also
believe that government has the capacity
the federal government has the capacity
to help open up opportunity and create
ladders of opportunity and to create
frameworks where the american people can
succeed look the genius of america is the free
enterprise system and freedom and the
fact that people can go out there and
start a business work on an idea make
their own decisions but as abraham
lincoln understood there are also some
things we do better together so in the
middle of the civil war abraham lincoln
said let's help to finance the
transcontinental railroad let's start
the national academy of sciences let's
start land-grant colleges because we
want to give these gateways of
opportunity for all americans because if
all americans are getting opportunity
we're all going to be better off that
doesn't restrict people's freedom that
enhances it and so what i've tried to do
as president is to apply those same
principles and when it comes to
education what i've said is we've got to
reform schools that are not working we
use something called race to the top
wasn't a top-down approach governor what
we've said is to states we'll give you
more money if you initiate reforms and
as a consequence you had 46 states
around the country who have made a real
difference but what i've also said is
let's hire another
hundred thousand math and science teachers to make sure
we maintain our technological lead and
our people are skilled and able to
succeed and hard-pressed states right now
can't all do that in fact we've seen
layoffs of hundreds of thousands of
teachers over the last several years and
governor romney doesn't think we need
more teachers i do because i think that
that is the kind of investment where the
federal government can help it can't
do it all but it can make a difference
and as a consequence we'll have a better
trained workforce and that will create
jobs because companies want to locate in
places where we've got a skilled
workforce two minutes governor on the role of
government your view well first i love
great schools massachusetts our schools
are ranked number one of all 50 states
and the key to great schools great
teachers so i reject the idea that i
don't believe in great teachers or more
teachers every school district every
state should make that decision on their
own the role of government look behind
us the constitution and the declaration
of independence the role of government
is to promote and protect the principles
of those documents first life and
liberty we have a responsibility to
protect the lives and liberties of our
people and that means a military second
to none i do not believe in cutting our
military i believe in maintaining the
strength of america's military second in
that line that says we are endowed by
our creator with our rights i believe we
must maintain our commitment to
religious tolerance and freedom in this
country that statement also says that we
are endowed by our creator with the
right to pursue happiness as we choose i
interpret that as one making sure that
those people who are less fortunate and
can't care for themselves are cared by
by one another we're a nation that
believes that we're all children of the
same god and we care for those that have
difficulties those that are elderly and
have problems and challenges those that
are disabled we care for them and we we
look for discovery and innovation all
these things desired out of the
american heart to provide the pursuit of
happiness for our citizens but we also
believe in maintaining for individuals
the right to pursue their dreams and not
to have the government substitute itself
for the rights of free individuals
and what we're seeing right now is in my
view a a trickle-down government
approach which has government thinking
it can do a better job than free people
pursuing their dreams and it's not
working and the proof of that is 23
million people out of work the proof of
that is one of six people in poverty
the proof of that is we've gone from 32
million on food stamps to 47 million on food
stamps the proof of that is that 50 percent of
college graduates this year can't find
work we know that the path we're taking
is not working it's time for a new path
all right let's go through some
specifics in terms of what how each of
you views the role of government how do
education does the federal
government have a responsibility to
improve the quality of public education
in america well the primary
responsibility for education is is of
course at the state and local level but
the federal government also can play a
very important role and i and i agree
with secretary arne duncan he's some
ideas he's put forward on race to the
top not all of them but some of them i
agree with and and congratulate him for
pursuing that the federal government can
get local and and state schools to do a
better job
my own view by the way is i've added to
that i happen to believe i want the kids
that are getting federal dollars from
idea or title i these are disabled kids
or or poor kids or lower-income kids
rather i want them to be able to go to
the school of their choice so all
federal funds instead of going to the to
the state or to the school district i'd
have go if you will follow the child and
let the parent and the child decide
where to send their their their student
how do you see the federal government's
responsibility to as i say to improve
the quality of public education in this
country well as i've indicated i think
that it has a significant role to play
through our race to the top program
we've worked with republican and
democratic governors to initiate major
reforms and they're having an impact
right now do you think you have a
difference with your views and and those
of governor romney on about education
and the federal government you know this is where budgets matter because
budgets reflect choices so when governor
romney indicates that he wants to cut
taxes and potentially benefit folks like
me and him
and to pay for it we're having to
initiate significant cuts in federal
support for education that makes a
difference you know his his running mate
congressman ryan put forward a budget
that reflects many of the principles
that governor romney's talked about and
it wasn't very detailed this seems to be
a trend but but what it did do is to if
you extrapolated how much money we're
talking about you'd look at cutting the
education budget by up to 20 percent when it
comes to community colleges we are
seeing great work done out there all
over the country because we have the
opportunity to train people for jobs
that exist right now and one of the
things i suspect governor romney and i
probably agree on is getting businesses
to work with community colleges so that
they're setting up their training
programs do you do you agree governor let me just finish the boring it's
goodbye when i go in fact ob let's go
around my state back by the
where they're partnering so that
they're designing training programs and
people who are going through them know
that there's a job waiting for them if
they complete that makes a big
difference but that requires some
federal support let me just say one
final example when it comes to making
college affordable whether it's two-year
or four-year one of the things that i did as
president was we were sending sixty
billion dollars to banks and lenders as
middlemen for the student loan program
even though the loans were guaranteed so
there was no risk for the banks or the
lenders but they were taking billions
out of the system and we said why not
cut out the middleman and as a
consequence what we've been able to do
is to provide millions more students
assistance lower or keep low
interest rates on student loans and this
is an example of where our priorities
make a difference governor romney i
genuinely believe cares about education
but when he tells a student that you
know you should borrow money from your
parents to go to college you know that
indicates the degree to which you know
there may not be as much of a focus on
the fact that folks like
myself folks like michelle kids probably
who attend university of denver just
don't have that option and for us to be
able to make sure that they've got that
opportunity and they can walk through
that door that is vitally important not
just to those kids it's how we're going
to grow this economy over the long term
we're running out of time gentlemen respond to that mr president mr president you're entitled
as the president your own airplane and
your own house but not to your own facts
all right i'm not going to cut education
funding i don't have any plan to cut
education funding and and grants that go
to people going to college i'm planning
on continuing to grow so i'm not
planning on making changes there but
you make a very good point which is that
the place you put your money just
makes a pretty clear indication of where
your heart is you put 90 billion dollars
into into green jobs and i look i'm all
in favor of green energy 90 billion that
would have that would have hired 2
million teachers 90 billion dollars and
these businesses many of them have gone
into business i think about half of them
of the ones have been invested and have
gone to business a number of them happen
to be owned by bit by by people who are
contributors to your campaigns look the
right course for america's government
we're talking about the role of
government is not to become the economic
player picking winners and losers
telling people what kind of health a
treatment they can receive taking over
the health care system that has existed
in this country for for a long long time
and has produced the best health records
in the world the right answer for
government is to say how do we make the
private sector become more efficient and
more effective how do we get schools to
be more competitive
let's grade them i propose we grade our
schools so parents know which schools
are succeeding and failing so they can
take their child to a school that's
being more successful i don't want to
cut our commitment to education i wanted
to make it more effective and efficient
and by the way i've had that experience
i don't just talk about it i've been
massachusetts schools are ranked number
one in the nation this is not because i
didn't have commitment to education it's
because i care about education for all
of our kids
all right gentlemen give me one sec look
at me sir we got we got barely have
three minutes left
i'm not going to grade the two of you
and say you your answers have been too
long or or i've done a poor job not a
great job oh well no but the fact is
government the role of government and
governing we've we've lost a pot in
other words so we only have three free
minutes left in the in the debate before
we go to your closing statements and so
i want to ask finally here and remember
we've got three minutes total time here
and the question is this many of the
legislative functions
i'll part
gridlock elected in your case if
reelected in your case what would you do
about that governor jim i had the great
it didn't seem like at the time of being
elected in a state where my legislature
was 87 percent democrat and that meant i
figured out from day one i had to get
along and i had to work across the aisle
to get anything done we drove our
schools to be number one in the nation
we cut taxes 19 times what would you do
it because as president i will sit down
on day one actually the day after i get
elected i'll sit down with leaders the
democratic leaders as well as republican
leaders and continue as we did in my
state we met every monday for a couple
hours talked about the issues and the
challenges in the in our state in that
case we have to work on a collaborative
basis not because we're gonna compromise
our principle but because there's common
ground and the challenges america faces
right now look the reason i'm in this
race is they're people that are really
hurting today in this country and we
face this deficit could crush the future
generations what's happening in the
middle east there are developments
around the world that are of real
concern and republicans and democrats
both love america but we need to have
leadership leadership in washington that
will actually bring people together and
get the job done and could not care less
if if it's a republican or a democrat
i've done it before i'll do it again
mr president first of all i think
governor romney is gonna have a busy
first day because he's also going to
repeal obamacare which will not be very
popular among democrats as you're
sitting down with them but look my
philosophy has been i will take ideas
from anybody democrat or republican as
long as they're advancing the cause
making middle-class families stronger
and giving ladders of opportunity into
the middle class that's how we cut taxes
for middle-class families and small
businesses that's how we cut the
trillion dollars of spending that wasn't
advancing that cause that's how we
signed three trade deals into law that
are helping us to double our exports and
sell more american products around the
world that's how we repeal don't ask
don't tell that's how we ended the war
in iraq as i promised and that's how
we're gonna wind down the war in
afghanistan that's how we at went after
al-qaeda and bin laden
so we've we've seen progress even under
republican control of the house of
representatives but ultimately part of
being principled part of being a leader
is a being able to describe exactly what
it is that you intend to do not just
saying i'll sit down but you have to
have a plan number two what's important
is occasionally you've got to say no to
two folks both in your own party and in
the other party and you know yes have we
had some fights between me and the
republicans when they fought back
against us reining in the excesses of
wall street absolutely because that was
a fight that needed to be had when when
we were fighting about whether or not we
were gonna make sure that americans had
more security with their health
insurance and they said no yes that was
a fight that we needed to have and so
part of leadership and governing is both
saying what it is that you are for but
also being willing to say no to some
things and i've got to tell you governor
romney when it comes to his own party
during the course of this campaign has
not displayed that willingness to say no
to some of the more extreme parts of his
that brings us to closing statements
there's a coin toss governor romney you
won the toss and you elected to go last
so you have opposing two minutes mr
president well jim i want to thank you
and i want to thank governor romney
because i think this was a terrific
debate and i very much appreciate it and
i want to thank the university of denver
you know four years ago we were going
through a major crisis and yet my faith
and confidence in the american future is
undiminished and the reason is because
of its people because the woman i met in
north carolina who decided at 55 to go
back to school because she wanted to
inspire her daughter and now has a job
from that new training that she's gotten
because a company in minnesota who was
willing to give up salaries and perks
for their executives to make sure that
they didn't lay off workers during a
recession the auto workers that you meet
in toledo or detroit take such pride in
building the best cars in the world
not just because of paycheck but because
it gives them that sense of pride that
they're helping to build america and so
the question now is how do we build on
those strengths and everything that i've
tried to do and everything that i'm now
proposing for the next four years in
terms of improving our education system
or developing american energy or making
sure that we're closing loopholes for
companies that are shipping jobs
overseas and focusing on small
businesses companies that are creating
jobs here in the united states or or
closing our deficit in a responsible
balanced way that allows us to invest in
our future all those things are designed
to make sure that the american people
their genius their grit their
determination is is channeled and and
and and they have an opportunity to
succeed and everybody is getting a fair
shot and everybody is getting a fair
share hey everybody's doing a fair share
and everybody is playing by the same
rules you know four years ago i said
that i'm not a perfect man and i
wouldn't be a perfect president and
that's probably a promise that governor
romney thinks i've kept but i also
promise that i fight every single day on
behalf of the american people in the
middle class and all those who are
striving to get in the middle class i've
kept that promise
and if you'll vote for me then i promise
i'll fight just as hard in a second term
governor romney your two-minute close
thank you jim and mr president thank
you for tuning in this evening this is
an important election and i'm concerned
about america i'm concerned about the
direction america has been taking over
the last four years i i know this is
bigger than election about the two of us
as individuals it's bigger than our
respective parties it's an election
about the course of america what kind of
america do you want to have for yourself
and for your children and there really
are two very different paths that we
began speaking about this evening and
over the course of this month we're
going to have two more presidential
debates in a vice presidential debate
we'll talk about those two paths but
they lead in very different directions
and it's not just looking to our words
that you have to take an evidence of
where they go you can look at the record
there's no question in my mind that if
the president were to be re-elected
you'll continue to see a middle-class
squeeze with incomes going down and
prices going up i'll get incomes up
you'll see chronic unemployment we've
had 43 straight months with unemployment
above 8 if i'm president i will create
help create 12 million new jobs in this
country with rising incomes the
president's re-elected obama care will
be fully installed in my view that's
going to mean a whole different way of
life for people who counted on the
insurance plan they had in the past many
will lose it you're going to see health
premiums go up by some two thousand five
or dollars per per family if i'm elected
we won't have obamacare we'll put in
place the kind of principles that i've
put in place at my own state and allow
each state to craft their own programs
to get people insured and we'll focus on
getting the cost of health care down if
the president were to be re-elected
you're gonna see a 716 billion dollar
cut to medicare you'll have 4 million
people who will lose medicare advantage
you'll have hospitals and providers that
will no longer accept medicare patients
i'll restore that 716 billion dollars to
medicare and finally military the
president's re-elected you'll see
dramatic cuts to our military the
secretary of defense has said these
would be even devastating i will not cut
our commitment to our military i will
keep america strong and get america's
middle class working again thank you jim
thank you governor thank you mr
the next debate will be the
vice-presidential event on thursday
october 11th at centre college in
danville kentucky for now from the
university of denver i'm jim lehrer
thank you and good night
welcome back the first presidential
debate has just wrapped up and we've got
a full hour of analysis ahead let's jump
right in with white house correspondent